Hello friends
In this video let us learn the bubble sort algorithm
implementation
So in the previous video we have learnt how bubble
sort works and we designed an algorithm for it
so let us quickly revise it
We will have the array and in bubble sort we will
continuously compare adjacent elements
And after four cycle of comparison the largest element will
reach the last position
And we will compare the remaining elements then and the
largest element of these will then come to the second
last position and this will continue
And finally we will get this sorted array
So that was bubble sort
So in this video let us learn the bubble sort
algorithm implementation how it works and step by step
So we have the function bubble sort which takes the
array to be sorted and its size as parameters
So we have this array with elements 50 25 5
20 and 10 and its size is five
And here we will use nested for loop
The inner for loop will compare the adjacent elements and
swap if needed
And this should be done for size minus one times
to get the sort of array And for that we
have the outer for loop which will run size minus
one times
So first we declare I and j and we have
the outer for loop
And in first iteration I equal to 0
And for the inner loop in first iteration J
is equal to zero
And we have if arr of j greater than arr
of J plus one that is we have comparing two
adjacent elements
And if the first one is larger than the second
it is not in the right order
So we have to swap
That is if this condition is true the first one
is larger than the second one so swap arr of J
and arr of J plus one Here arr of J
is equal to 50 and arr of J plus one
is equal to 25 and we have 50 greater than
So if is true so swap these two elements now
in the next iteration J is equal to one
And we have if arr of j greater than arr
of J plus one that is we're comparing the elements
that index one and two and we have 50 greater
than five
So if is again true
So we have to swap now in the next iteration
J is equal to two and we have if arr of
j greater than arr of J plus one that is
we are comparing elements at Index two and three and
we have 50 greater than 20
So if it is true so we have to swap
these two elements
So 50 and 20 are swapped now in the next
iteration J is equal to three again
We have to compare the elements at index three and
four and we have 50 greater than 10
So if is again true
So we have to swap these two elements
Now in the next iteration J is equal to four and
now the condition J lessthan size minus one minus
I fails since four is not less than four
So the first iteration of outer loop is now completed
That is the first cycle of comparison is done and
we got the largest element in the correct position
And this is what bubble sort does in each iteration
of outer
For loop one element comes to right position and from
now we won't consider it as it is already sorted
And that is why we have the condition J less
than size minus one minus
I in inner for loop
Now in the second iteration of Outer for Loop I
is equal to one
And inside we have the inner for Loop
And in first iteration of this loop J is equal to
zero
And we have if arr of J greater than an arr
of J Plus one and we are comparing the elements
that are index zero and one and we have 25 greater
than five
So if it's true here so we have to swap
these two elements now in the next iteration J is equal
to one
And we have if arr of J greater than arr
of J plus one that is we are comparing elements
that index one and two and we have 25 greater
than 20
So if it's true here also so we have to
swap 25 20 and it is done
And in the next iteration J is equal to two
And we have
If a r r of J greater than arr of
J plus one that is we are comparing the elements
at index two and three and we have 25 greater than
So if it's true here also so we have to
swap  25 10 now in the next iteration J is equal
to three
But now the condition J less than size minus one
minus
I fails
So second iteration of Outer for Loop is also completed
now and we got the second largest element
Also sorted now in the third iteration of Outer loop
is equal to two
And inside we have the inner for loop
And in first iteration of this loop J equal to
zero
And we have if arr of J greater than arr
of J plus one that is we are comparing the
elements that index zero and zero plus one that is
one and we have five not greater than 20
So if fails that is these two elements are already
in sorted order so there is no need to swap
them now
In the next iteration J is equal to one and
we have if arr of j greater than arr of
J plus one that is if arr of one greater
than arr of two and we have 20 greater than
So if it is true so we have to swap
these two elements
So 20 and 10 are swap Now in the next
iteration J is equal to two
But now the condition J less than size minus one
minus i that is five minus one minus two which is J less
than two fails as two is not less than two
So third iteration of outer for loop is also completed
now And we got the third largest element at the
right place
Now in the fourth iteration of outer loop i is equal
to three
And inside we have the inner for loop and in
first iteration of this inner for loop J is equal to
zero and we have if arr of J greater than arr
of J plus one that is We are comparing the
elements at index zero and one and we have five
not greater than 10
So if fails here that is
These two elements are already in sorted order so we
don't need to swap  them now
The next iteration J is equal to one
But now the condition J less than size minus one minus
I fails as one is not less than one so
fourth
iteration of outer for loop is also completed and regard
the fourth largest element
Also sorted
Now in the next iteration of outer loop I is
equal to four
But now the condition i less than size minus one fails
as four is not less than four
And now the control comes out of the loop and
we got the arry sorted
So that is how bubble sort function works
now let us take sorted array and analyse it
If we give this arrange of bubble sort function
it will first compare the 1st and 2nd elements
Since they are in sorted order there is no need
to swap next it will compare 2nd and 3rd elements
and it is also in sorted order
So again there is no need to swap
Similarly all comparisons will fail and we can understand that
there is no need to swap
It is already sorted but however our bubble sort function
will go on to the next cycle and compare the
first four elements again
And in the next cycle the first three elements will
be compared and this will continue
So the programme is unnecessarily comparing the sorted elements and
wasting CPU time
So what can we do here We can notice that
the sorted array doesn't need any swap  operation
So if no swap operation takes plus we can be
sure that the array sorted and we can break the
process
It will improve the efficiency of bubble Sort algorithm
Let us see how there is only a small change
that we need to make
In this function we will declare a flag variable and
initialised it to zero in the beginning of each iteration
of the outer loop
And whenever a swap operation takes place we will set
flag equal to one and at the end of each
iteration we will check
The flag is still equal to zero
Then we can understand that no swap operation took place
so we can break out of the loop
So see here we have assorted array of size five
and we passed this array to the function and
in first iteration of Outer loop i is equal to zero
and we declare and initialised flat to 0
And in first iteration of inner loop J is equal to
zero and we compare elements at J and J plus
one that is zero and one and we have 10
not greater than 20 so no Swap
And in next iteration J is equal to one and we
compare elements at J and J Plus one that is
one and two and 20 is not greater than 30
So there is no swap again
And in the next iteration J is equal to two and
we compare elements at two and three and we have 30
not greater than 40
So again there is no swap
And in next iteration J is equal to three and we
compare elements at J and J plus one that is
three and four and we have 40 not greater than
So again there is no swap
And in next iteration J is equal to four and now
the for loop condition fails and control comes out of
the Inner for loop and it checks
If flag is still equal to zero and it is
so it means that there was no swap operation and
the elements are sorted and we can break out of
the loop
So we have saved a lot of time an improved
efficiency of bubble sort function using this method
If this was the old function it would have gone
for three more iterations of outer for
Loop each with inner for loop printing for size minus
one minus i times
And now suppose the input array was not sorted and
there was one unsorted element
And in the first iteration there was one swap operation
which sets flag equal to one
And also in this iteration the array become sorted
So in the second iteration of outer for loop there
will be no swap operation
So when it checks for the flag value it will
be equal to zero
So the process will be stopped there that is
whenever Array becomes sorted
We can stop the process right there
So this is how bubble sort algorithm works
And we also learned how to improve the efficiency of
this algorithm
So in the next video we will analyse the time
and space complexity of the bubble sort algorithm .